Dear editor,

We are inquiring about the potential publication of our manuscript titled “The emergence of words from vocal imitations” in _Current Biology_. The reported experiments (involving nearly 1600 participants) examine the process by which spoken words can emerge from imitations of environmental sounds. We show how a simple process of unguided imitation results in vocal imitations transitioning to word-like forms. In the course of this transition, the vocal forms become more stable, repeatable, and more learnable as category labels. Remarkably, even after as many as 8 generations of participants, the forms still maintain resemblance to the sounds that motivated them such that naïve participants can guess the meaning of these “words” at levels considerably above change.

We believe this manuscript is suitable for the broad readership of _Current Biology_ for several reasons. First, the topic is of broad appeal, bridging between linguistics, cognitive psychology, and semiotics, with clear implications for widespread debates about the origins of human language. Second, our study is innovative, providing the first look at the emergence of categorical spoken labels from simple imitations. Third, more than simply detailing a set of results, this work introduces a novel method (complete with the requisite analyses and software) enabling others to conduct similar experiments to generalize beyond the set of meanings we tested.

We are strongly committed to openness and reproducibility. We have made available all of our data, analyses, and software in online repositories so that others can easily reproduce and extend our results. Links to software repositories and details for reproduction are provided in the Open Science Framework page for this research, available at: <osf.io/3navm>.

We thank you for your consideration of this manuscript.

Pierce Edmiston, Marcus Perlman, and Gary Lupyan


Abstract

People have long pondered the origins of language, especially the words that compose them. Here, we report a series of experiments investigating how conventional spoken words might emerge from imitations of environmental sounds. Does the repeated imitation of an environmental sound gradually give rise to novel word forms? In what ways do these words resemble the original sounds that motivated them? Participants played a version of the children’s game “Telephone”. The first generation of participants imitated recognizable environmental sounds (e.g., glass breaking, water splashing). Subsequent generations imitated the imitations for a maximum of 8 generations. The results showed that the imitations became more stable and word-like, and later imitations were easier to learn as category labels. At the same time, even after 8 generations, both spoken imitations and their written transcriptions could be matched above chance to the category of environmental sound that motivated them. These results show how repeated imitation can create progressively more word-like forms while continuing to retain a resemblance to the original sound that motivated them, and speak to the possible role of human vocal imitation in explaining the origins of at least some spoken words.
